PhD in Information Sciences | School of Information Sciences
School of Information Sciences
Search
Visit
What is an iSchool?
Request Information
Upcoming Events
Tuition & Financial Support
Recruitment & Admissions Staff
iSchool Ambassadors
Student Videos
Academics
Undergraduate
Graduate
Informatics Programs
Course Catalog
People
Dean's Cabinet
Faculty
Staff
Adjuncts & Affiliates
Emeriti Faculty
Doctoral Students
Committees
School Directory
Research
Areas
Projects
Vision
Labs
Services
Showcase
Research Fellows
Scholars-in-Residence
Postdoctoral Researchers
Videos
Engage
Corporate
Recruit iSchool Talent
Give
Host a Practicum
Alumni
Dean's Council
Student Life
Academic Support
Student Development Opportunities
Student Organizations
Convocation
Practicum & Career Courses
Career Support
Help Desk
News
News Feed
Events Calendar
In the Media
Publications
Upcoming Events
Lectures
Awards
About
Strategic Plan
History
Data and Reporting
iSchool at a Glance
Building Facilities
Community
Job Openings
Contact Us
PhD in Information Sciences
Join a renowned community of scholars
The work of our faculty defines the field and puts scholars like you at the forefront of the information society. When you join the iSchool, you'll benefit from the excellence and reputation of the nation's leading school in library and information studies. Our interdisciplinary research program responds to new social and technological opportunities for producing, analyzing, disseminating, and accessing information.
PhD students are
guaranteed financial support for five academic years
(excluding summers) through research assistantships, teaching assistantships, and fellowships. Our students come from a variety of academic backgrounds and professional experiences, creating a collaborative, innovative, and vibrant community of scholars.
The Information Sciences PhD program is a residency program. Students are required to complete all coursework while located in Champaign-Urbana. Students may choose to complete their research outside of Champaign-Urbana at the discretion of the faculty advisor. Please note that if an international student leaves Champaign-Urbana at any point during their study, this may impact funding opportunities through the iSchool.
APPLY
now!
Request
information
PhD student William Langston
chose the iSchool not only for its national and international reputation but also because it provides opportunities for interdisciplinary work and innovative research.
Careers
Our program opens doors, preparing students for successful careers. Recent graduates have obtained faculty positions with numerous universities including Denver, Rutgers University-New Brunswick, Indiana, Kentucky, Maryland-College Park, Michigan, Simmons, South Florida, UNC-Greensboro, Washington & Wayne State. Additionally, recent graduates have secured their first jobs in in a range of settings, including:
Privacy Researcher, Facebook
Research Scientist, PatientsLikeMe
Consultant, Deloitte
Data Scientist, U.S. Government
Digital Scholarship Librarian, DePaul University
Instructional Data Specialist, University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign
Cataloger, Princeton University
Core Investigator, Veterans Health Administration
Program overview
Work closely with your faculty advisor to create educational experiences both within and outside the classroom to support your professional goals. With only two required courses—
History and Foundations in IS (IS 509)
and
Research Design in IS (IS 519)
—you can customize your degree through a broad range of electives. Your program will consist of 48 hours of coursework and 32 hours of dissertation work. Required milestones that will help to build your research expertise include:
Field exam in a significant sub-area of IS
Research presentation to demonstrate research competency
Dissertation culminating in a public presentation, defense, and submission
For a more detailed program overview, please visit
Program Overview
Plan
your program
Explore
our course catalog
I decided to pursue a PhD because I wanted to deepen my understanding of how technology and society interact and to design equitable approaches to technology and education, especially for communities that are often overlooked in mainstream technology development.
Ebubechukwu Uba,
PhD Student
Meet
our distinguished faculty
Meet
our doctoral students
Explore your research focus
You want to do important work that makes an impact and to collaborate with leaders in the field. We have the resources and the expertise to help you accomplish just that.
iSchool researchers address key challenges at the intersection of people, information, and technology in highly multidisciplinary ways. Our
strategic research vision
drives the scope of our
research projects
and presents a distinct imprint for the substance and impact of our work in areas such as:
Scientific data and knowledge practices
Organization of knowledge and information
Data curation
Digital humanities
Digital libraries
Community informatics
Youth services and digital youth
Informetrics
Human-computer interaction
Human-centered data science and social computing
Information privacy, security, and ethics
Health and bioinformatics
History of information
ASPIRE Illinois offers an opportunity for traditionally underrepresented students in graduate education to explore and consider graduate school at the University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign. Toward this aim, the program provides preapplication supports and hosts campus visits.
Learn more
about ASPIRE Illinois
Support for leading-edge research
Flourish at a research university
The University of Illinois is a preeminent public research university, which means you will have access to exceptional resources beyond those in the iSchool:
Blue Waters Petascale Supercomputer
University Library
Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology
National Center for Supercomputing Applications
Get the support you need
Research Services
supports and promotes the research activities of the iSchool, large or small, funded or unfunded. At the iSchool, you'll find supportive staff ready to help you with:
Project planning and consulting
Grant proposal development
Research administration
Research policies & IRB
Student grants
Research infrastructure
PhD student Andrew Zalot
chose the iSchool mostly because of its faculty but found an "amazing community of doctoral students" and a positive culture in which to collaborate and engage in creative research opportunities.
Questions? I can help.
Vetle Torvik,
Associate Professor and Interim PhD Program Director
ischool-phd@illinois.edu
School of Information Sciences
501 E. Daniel St.
MC-493
Champaign, IL
61820-6211
Voice: (217) 333-3280
Email:
ischool@illinois.edu
About Cookies
Back to top